Egypt Qatar and the US have released a
joint statement after two days of talks
in Doha on the Gaza War they're backing
what they call a bridging proposal which
they hope will bring Hamas and Israel
closer to a ceasefire deal Hamas refused
to take part in the talks accusing
Israel of negotiating in bad faith
International negotiators are seeking to
avert a regional conflict end the 10mon
long war in Gaza and secure the release
of Israeli hostages taken in the October
7th Terror
attacks negotiations are ongoing with
senior officials set to convene again in
Cairo next week speaking to reporters in
Washington US President Joe Biden
expressed optimism about the new
deal I'll say one thing about one of the
reason why I was late for you all was I
was dealing with the ceasefire effort in
the Middle East and uh we are closer
than we've ever been I don't want to
jinx anything may have something but
we're not there yet but it's much much
closer than it was 3 days ago so keep
your fingers thank you journalist kri
mahori joins us from Cairo Biden is
optimistic not the first time we've
heard that how much ground is there for
optimism well clearly the US is
spreading optimism without talking
really about the substance of the
negotiations we hear less from Qatar and
Egypt it is really about the substance
not so much about for example that Hamas
was not present in the negotiations I
think that's a bit of an overstated fact
because they have also an office in in
Qatar in Doha they were informed they
were also probably indirectly involved
in this it's a bit of an irony that the
US is trying to nearly bully all sides
now into this ceasefire and it's a bit
of an irony that the because the US has
always in the last months since the war
breakout uh me any ceasefire demands in
the UN several times um now it cannot
come fast enough for the US and I think
the reasons are there are several
reasons for that one is of course the
big fear in the US that this might
regionally SP spiral out of control
we've seen uh that there's still the
threat of R territory of strikes from
Iran and from hisbah and from the hes in
Yemen after the killing of uh
the head of Hamas is Han in Iran and the
killing of a big a high military
commander fuad shuker of hisa in um in
Beirut so that's one of the big fears
and that's one reasons why the US is in
a rush to get a ceasefire deal done
because that is the key for deescalation
in the whole region the second of course
is the upcoming elections and then not
to forget uh sending weapons and keeping
the US Fleet on Alert in the
Mediterranean costs also quite a lot of
money us officials are trying to
convince Israel that it achieved
everything it can achieve militarily
saying to them they will never be able
to eliminate Hamas and but Netanyahu is
still speaking about a total victory
over Hamas and Karim this new amended
plan is considered a bridging proposal
what are the bridging points
it's called a bridging proposal that
closes most of the remaining gaps um and
the biggest Gap here is that netan
refuses to commit to a permanent
ceasefire a key
Demand by Hamas that also Demands a full
withdrawal of the Israeli Army from the
Gaza Strip and this is not a detail but
sometimes is mirrored in details let me
give you some examples what for example
happens with the Raa Crossing between
Egypt and the Gaza Strip who is going to
control it Israeli Army and if not the
Israeli Army who is going to control
this border the same thing counts for
the Philadelphia Corridor that is the
border between Egypt and Israel there
it's a narim corridor that cuts where
the Israeli Army is positioned in the
Gaza Strip that cuts basically the Gaza
Strip into a northern and southern part
and people cannot cross this Corridor so
these are the details that I think all
this discussed what to do uh with this
issue so uh the devil is in the detail
but the big big picture is really the
difference between permanent ceasefire
and Netanyahu is still talking about
destroying
Hamas kareim alori in Cairo thanks for
the
update you're
welcome for more on this let's now speak
to Brian catulus he's the senior fellow
for US foreign policy at the Middle East
Institute in Washington DC wel welc to
DW Brian I want to start by asking you
do we know what is making Biden so
optimistic about this long delay
deal I think one thing that's making him
optimistic is that the war that many
people feared that Iran and Hezbollah
might launch in reaction to Israeli
strikes a couple of weeks ago has not
yet happened and the simp simple fact of
the matter is that there's an Impulse to
try to double down on diplomacy to end
the Gaza war in part to try to prevent a
wider Regional war that would drag the
United States Iran Hezbollah Israel into
a wider conflagration so I think maybe
that's one thing that gives him a little
bit of Hope the second thing is he he
actually may be doing this to to try to
P push things along across the Finish
Line because it's been a very difficult
negotiation it's been essentially two
and a half months since he Biden
released his his own plan for a
ceasefire and it's been hard to get to
this point so I think some of this may
be a bit of Wishful Thinking given the
in compatibility of the the views of
Hamas and Israel's current leadership as
well I want you to elaborate on that
wishful thinking as well do you share
that optimism or do you think it's
misplaced I think it's slightly
misplaced because if you look at the the
fundamental um positions of his the
current Israeli government and the
leaders of Hamas uh they're they're just
at odds um essentially Israel is
negotiating uh through qar and Egypt in
the United States uh with leader that it
says it wants to kill and it's
negotiating that because they want to
gain the release of some hostages Hamas
is negotiating in part to survive um its
leaders have been targeted in a series
of strikes Israel has vowed to kill a
lot of its leaders so you may get to the
first part of Biden's plan which was
released in late May which was a release
of certain um hostages women that are
held by Hamas and Gaza but not the
military um IDF soldiers and other
things like this you may get to a
temporary ceasefire like we saw at the
end of November early December but the
longer term plan the the phase two and
phase three of the Biden plan released
in May it seems pretty hard to get there
just because the two main combatants
Israel and Hamas don't recognize each
other's legitimacy and both want to wipe
each other off the map so that's what
makes it difficult I think in the long
run so you describe some of the ways in
which these compromises may be re may be
reached is this the gaps that that
mediators are saying that they're hoping
to close and that this new deal will
close or are there is there more that
we're
missing I think so this negotiation is
not just about when do the hostilities
end right now or how many hostages or
Palestinian prisoners are released in a
matter of a few weeks like we saw
November December it's essentially
trying to negotiate the terms for what
um a sustainable ceasefire might look
like and there are questions that are
quite thorny like
does Israel have the right to go in with
its military to go after what it sees as
Hamas threats inside of Gaza inside of
Gaza territory as we see in the West
Bank which is another occupied territory
um that Israel maintains a presence in
it goes in uh at will to actually defeat
threats and that's one thing I think
they're negotiating right now is what is
the status of Israeli forces are they
out of Gaza if so who will actually
maintain Law and Order and those sorts
of things aren't about the immediate
ceasefire they're about that interim
period and that's what makes it so
difficult and even if they get to this
first phase as I said an exchange of
prisoners and hostages and a cessation
of hostilities for a period of time it's
much harder to actually conceive of that
sustainable piece I I hope it happens
because 40,000 people have been killed
in Gaza Israelis are threatened every
day with rocket attacks uh from across
many of its borders so we need stability
in the Middle East we don't need a wider
War which I think again that's another
benefit of what this diplomacy has
offered is that it's prevented uh what
many had feared which is Iran and
Hezbollah retaliating for Israel's
attacks on on its uh some of its leaders
a few weeks ago Brian culis in
Washington DC thank you so much for
explaining that so clearly to
us thank you